docs(billing): formal documentation of Okteto's billing model (#1231)
okteto/docs: src/content/billing.mdx

---
title: Billing
description: How Okteto bills per seat. Per-account 45-day grace window, what's counted and what's not, and how to manage your seat usage.
sidebar_label: Billing
id: billing
---

# Billing

> Okteto's billing follows a familiar model for developer tools: per seat, annual, with a 45-day grace window for new accounts and a true-up if your usage grows. We charge for accounts in the system, not for environments or agents.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Okteto bills per seat on an annual contract. New accounts get a 45-day grace window before they count toward billing, and seat overages are settled with a true-up. Okteto does not charge per environment or per agent.
```

## The short version

> - **Per seat**, like every developer tool you already buy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Pricing is per seat**, billed annually.
```

- **No charge per agent or per environment.** Run as many development environments and agents per developer as your infrastructure supports.

> - **45-day grace window for one-off events.** Accounts less than 45 days old are not counted toward billing. The grace window is intended to cover short-lived events like hackathons, trainings, or evaluations. It is not a buffer for steady-state team growth: if your team is growing, please reach out to your account team proactively.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **45-day grace window for one-off events.** User accounts less than 45 days old are not counted toward billing. The grace window is intended to cover short-lived events like hackathons, trainings, or evaluations. It is not a buffer for steady-state team growth: if your team is growing, please reach out to your account team proactively.
```

> - **No hard cap.** New accounts keep being created without service interruption.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **No hard cap.** New user accounts can keep being created without service interruption.
```

> - **Self-service visibility.** See your account count in the [Admin Dashboard](admin/dashboard.mdx) or via the [Okteto API](admin/okteto-api.mdx) at any time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Self-service visibility.** See your user seat count in the [Admin Dashboard](admin/dashboard.mdx) or via the [Okteto API](admin/okteto-api.mdx) at any time.
```

## What is a seat?

A seat is one user account in your Okteto instance, identified by an email address. When a user logs in for the first time, an account is automatically created.

We do **not** count:

- The number of development environments a developer creates.
- The number of agents (Okteto, AI, or otherwise) that operate on behalf of that developer.
- Service accounts and bots that the platform itself uses.

If you bought 50 seats, you can have 50 accounts in your system. Each one can run as many environments and agents as your cluster supports.

:::note

> Your contract refers to "Users" and "User Allowance". This page uses "seat" because that is how the industry talks about it. They mean the same thing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your contract refers to "Users" and "User Allowance". This page uses "seat"; the terms are equivalent.
```

:::

## How the count works

> The rule, plainly:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> **Your billable seat count is the number of accounts in your Okteto instance that are more than 45 days old.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Your billable seat count is the number of user accounts in your Okteto instance that are more than 45 days old.**
```

Two consequences worth understanding:

> 1. **The 45-day grace window covers short-lived accounts.** It is meant for one-off events like hackathons, trainings, or evaluations, not as a buffer for steady-state hiring. If your team is growing, the right move is to talk to your account team early rather than rely on the grace window.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **The 45-day grace window covers short-lived accounts.** It is meant for one-off events like hackathons, trainings, evaluations: anything where you'll delete the accounts within 45 days. It is not a buffer for permanent hiring; for that, contact your account team to expand your seat allowance.
```

2. **Inactive accounts still count.** If an account is in the system, it counts (once it ages past 45 days). Deactivating, blocking, or simply abandoning an account does **not** remove it from the count. The account must be **deleted**.

## How to manage your seat count

> - **Delete accounts you no longer need.** Once an account is deleted, it disappears from the count immediately, regardless of age. Accounts cannot be reassigned to new users; when a different person logs in with their email, a new account is created automatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Delete user accounts you no longer need.** Once a user account is deleted, it disappears from the count immediately, regardless of age. Accounts cannot be reassigned to new users; when a different person logs in with their email, a new account is created automatically.
```

> - **Use Okta to deprovision automatically.** If your team is on Okta, Okteto supports automatic user deprovisioning so that accounts are deleted as soon as the user is removed from your identity provider. See [Okta User Deprovisioning](admin/integrations/okta-user-deprovisioning.mdx).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Use Okta to deprovision automatically.** If your team uses Okta, configure [Okta User Deprovisioning](admin/integrations/okta-user-deprovisioning.mdx) to delete accounts automatically when users are removed from your identity provider.
```

- **Use the Okteto API.** The [Okteto API](admin/okteto-api.mdx) supports listing users and deleting users by ID, so you can wire account cleanup into your own offboarding scripts or integrations.

A practical pattern for one-off events like hackathons or trainings: create the accounts for the event, run the event, then delete the accounts within 45 days.

> For sustained team growth, the better path is to add seats proactively with your account team. Add-on seats purchased in advance are typically cheaper than waiting for a true-up, and it keeps the relationship transparent on both sides.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For permanent team growth, contact your Okteto account team to purchase additional seats in advance. Add-on seats are typically cheaper than waiting for a true-up.
```

## Checking your seat usage

The account count in your Okteto instance is visible in the [Admin Dashboard](admin/dashboard.mdx) and via the [Okteto API](admin/okteto-api.mdx).

> This count reflects every account currently in the system, regardless of age. The 45-day grace window is applied during billing, not in the application itself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This count reflects every user account currently in the system, regardless of age. The 45-day grace window is applied during billing, not in the application itself.
```

> Our billing team performs a monthly check. If we observe that your account count exceeds your allowance, we will reach out. If the additional accounts are less than 45 days old, no action is required. We trust our customers; we are both working toward the same goal: making your team more effective. The simplest path, if your team is growing, is to let your account team know proactively. Add-on seats purchased in advance are typically cheaper than waiting for a true-up.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Okteto checks user account counts monthly. If your count exceeds your allowance, your Okteto account team will reach out. No action is required if the additional users accounts are less than 45 days old.
```

## What happens when you exceed your seats

You are not blocked when you go over. New accounts can keep being created without service interruption.

> When the count of accounts older than 45 days exceeds your purchased seat allowance:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the count of user accounts older than 45 days exceeds your purchased seat allowance:
```

1. **We notify you first.** Unless you have explicitly told us otherwise, we will reach out before invoicing any true-up. Add-on seats purchased proactively are typically cheaper than waiting for the true-up.

> 2. **True-up at your contracted rate.** The additional seats are billed at the per-seat price on your Order Form, pro-rated over the remaining months of your current annual term, and invoiced immediately.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **True-up at your contracted rate.** The additional user seats are billed at the per-seat price on your Order Form, pro-rated over the remaining months of your current annual term, and invoiced immediately.
```

3. **Renewal updated.** At the start of your next annual period, your subscription is updated to reflect the new seat count so the math is clean going forward.

## Frequently asked questions

### Do I get charged when a developer runs an extra environment?

No. We charge for seats, not environments. A developer with one seat can run as many environments as your cluster supports.

### What about AI agents or build agents that use Okteto on a developer's behalf?

Not counted. A seat is a human, identified by email.

### Can I reassign a seat from a former employee to their replacement?

Accounts are not reassigned. Delete the former employee's account; when their replacement logs in with their own email, a new account is automatically created. Because new accounts have a 45-day grace window, this swap does not increase your billable seat count immediately.

### We ran a hackathon. The 30 attendees signed up, used Okteto for 3 days, and won't log in again. Do we owe anything?

> This is exactly what the 45-day grace window is for. Delete the accounts within 45 days and they will not be counted toward your allowance. (Their loss, honestly. They're going back to mounting volumes and rebuilding containers from scratch.) If your team is regularly running events at this scale, let your account team know so we can make sure your subscription is sized appropriately.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is exactly what the 45-day grace window is for. Delete the accounts within 45 days and they will not be counted toward your allowance. If your team is regularly running events at this scale, let your account team know so we can make sure your subscription is sized appropriately.
```

### Our team grew permanently. We have 10 extra accounts that have been in the system for 60 days. What happens?

> You are now in true-up territory. We will bill the 10 seats at your contracted rate, pro-rated over the months remaining in your current term, and your renewal will reflect the new seat count.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is a true-up scenario. The 10 additional seats are billed at your contracted rate, pro-rated over the remaining months of your annual term, and your renewal reflects the new seat count.
```
